---
layout: post
title: Kedron
tags:
 - music
 - sacredharp
---

Kedron (SH 48) is known to most Sacred Harp singers as a lovely, stark and
simple minor-key tune. So I was startled to see that the [original
version, in the *United States Sacred
Harmony*](http://people.bethel.edu/~rhomar/TunePages/Kedron.html), is
strikingly chromatic in a way unlike anything else I've encountered in the modern
shapenote repertoire.

I've copied over the tune as it's written there, with the changed notes in red.

{% lilypond template=sh4.ly %}
{% key g %}

{% treble b2 b4 b4 | g2 g | a4 c b2| b b4 b | b2 a | g4 e b'2  | %}
{% treble b b4 e | d2 e | b4 b d2 | d d4 c | b2 g4.( a8) | b4 b b2 %}

{% alto \override Accidental #'color = #red %}
{% alto e,2 e4 e e2 \rednote g fis4 e \rednote fis2 %}
{% alto \rednote d2 e4 e e2 d2 \rednote b4 \rednote cis \rednote d2 %}
{% alto g2 fis4 g d2 e d4 \rednote d \rednote d2 %}
{% alto fis2 g4 \rednote fis e2 e \rednote dis4 \rednote dis  e2 %}

{% tenor \override Accidental #'color = #red %}
{% tenor g4.( fis8) e4 e | b'2 b | a4 g fis2 | g4.( fis8) e4 e | e'2  f4( e) | d c b2 %}
{% tenor e2 dis4 e | \afterGrace b2 { \rednote a8 } g2 | d'4 \afterGrace b4 { \rednote a8 } a2 %}
{% tenor  a b4 e, | \afterGrace g2 { a4 } \afterGrace  b2 { a4 } | g4 fis e2 %}

{% bass e2 e4 b | e2 e | d4 e b2 | b e4 e | g2 d | \rednote d4 e b2 %}
{% bass  e b'4 b | g2 b | g4 e d2 | d g4 g8.[ fis16] | e2 e | b4 b e2 %}
{% endlilypond %}

The tenor line is the same as the familiar one, except for two grace notes and
two accidentals --- but *what accidentals!* The first of the two, the lowered
`mi` in bar 5, is totally unique as far as I know:
you occasionally hear a lowered `mi` in a major-key tune, but I've never seen
one in this tradition in minor.  Technically speaking, the effect is to take us temporarily out
of standard Aeolian minor and into the Phrygian mode. Aesthetically... well, I
think it's haunting, though also quite unfamiliar-sounding (and hard to sing, at
least for me).

The alto line has quite a few changes, but there are two that jump out. I'm
very fond of the `so` in bar 4, which changes the harmony: it is now a G
major chord rather than an E minor. The raised `fa` in bar 6, on the other
hand, clashes so dramatically with the melody that it is almost unsingable
unless you raise the melody's `fa` as well --- which some singers would do anyway.

It's also interesting to see the extra grace notes in the tenor line --- and
this time it's not because they're unusual, but because they're so ordinary. At
least one of the two, the one in bar 9, I'm fairly certain I've heard sung
before: it is a sort of embellishment that many modern traditional singers add
without thinking, and seeing it written in here makes me wonder if it was
already part of the tradition then.
